\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename agent-log.info
@settitle agent-log: Browse AI coding agent session logs in Emacs
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs misc features
@direntry
* Agent-Log: (agent-log). Browse AI coding agent session logs in Emacs.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title agent-log: Browse AI coding agent session logs in Emacs
@author Pablo Stafforini (@email{pablo@@stafforini.com})
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top agent-log: Browse AI coding agent session logs in Emacs

This manual describes the features and customization options for the @samp{agent-log} package (@samp{agent-log.el} and its backend files).

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::
* Installation::
* User options::
* Commands::
* @code{agent-log-mode}::
* How it works::
* Troubleshooting::
* License::
* Indices::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Installation

* Manual installation::
* Installation with use-package::

User options

* Backend configuration::
* Directory configuration::
* Display of thinking and tool sections::
* Timestamps::
* Tool output limits::
* Session browser options::
* Live updates::
* Summary generation: Summary generation (1). 
* AI search options::

Commands

* Session browsing::
* Rendered directory::
* Sync and rendering::
* Navigation::
* Section visibility::
* Copying::
* Summary generation::
* Session rename::
* AI search::
* Session resumption::

Summary generation

* Automatic summarization on session end::

@code{agent-log-mode}

* @code{agent-log-search-mode}::
* Transient menu::

How it works

* Backend architecture::
* Data sources::
* Rendered directory structure::
* Rendering pipeline::
* Live update mechanism::

Troubleshooting

* No sessions found::
* Rendered files not updating::
* Live updates not working::

Indices

* Function index::
* Variable index::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Overview
@chapter Overview

AI coding agents such as @uref{https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code, Claude Code} and @uref{https://openai.com/index/introducing-codex/, Codex} store complete conversation transcripts as JSONL files.  While these files contain a full record of every session, they are not human-readable: each line is a JSON object with nested content arrays, tool-use blocks, thinking sections, and system metadata.  @samp{agent-log.el} renders these transcripts into readable Markdown files and provides a dedicated Emacs interface for browsing, searching, and navigating them.

The package supports multiple backends through a generic interface based on @code{cl-defstruct} and @code{cl-defmethod}.  Each backend knows how to discover sessions, parse its tool's JSONL format, and normalize entries into a canonical representation that the rendering pipeline, session browser, and AI features operate on.  Currently supported backends are Claude Code (@samp{agent-log-claude.el}) and Codex (@samp{agent-log-codex.el}).  By default, the package auto-detects which tools are installed and activates the corresponding backends (@ref{Backend configuration}).

The package maintains a mirror directory of pre-rendered Markdown files, organized by project.  This means that standard tools such as @samp{consult-ripgrep}, Dired, and @samp{grep} work natively on readable content without any special integration.

The core capabilities of @samp{agent-log.el} are:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Session browsing}.  A @code{completing-read} interface lists all sessions, grouped by project or as a flat list, sorted by recency.  Each candidate shows the date, project name, and either an AI-generated summary or the first user message (@ref{Session browsing}).
@item
@strong{Lazy rendering}.  Sessions are rendered to @samp{.md} files on first access.  The package tracks JSONL file sizes in an index to avoid re-rendering files that have not changed (@ref{Sync and rendering}).
@item
@strong{Live updates}.  For active sessions, a @code{file-notify} watcher detects JSONL changes and appends new entries to both the @samp{.md} file on disk and the open buffer in real time (@ref{Live updates}).
@item
@strong{Outline navigation}.  Rendered buffers use @code{outline-minor-mode} for folding tool calls, thinking blocks, and tool results.  Dedicated keybindings jump between conversation turns (@ref{Navigation}).
@item
@strong{Smart tool summaries}.  Each tool call is summarized by its most relevant input—the file path for Read/Write, the command for Bash, the pattern for Grep, and so on.
@item
@strong{AI-powered session summaries}.  An optional integration with @samp{gptel} generates concise one-line and paragraph summaries for each session, displayed in the browser and at the top of rendered buffers (@ref{Summary generation}).
@item
@strong{AI-powered search}.  A two-stage LLM pipeline lets you search your session history with natural language queries.  A scope-narrowing model filters sessions by project and date range, then a selection model identifies the most relevant sessions and presents a narrative with clickable links (@ref{AI search}).
@item
@strong{Session resumption}.  You can resume any session directly in the coding agent from within the rendered buffer, provided the corresponding Emacs integration package is installed (e.g. @samp{claude-code} for Claude Code) (@ref{Session resumption}).
@end itemize

The package requires Emacs 29.1 or later and @uref{https://jblevins.org/projects/markdown-mode/, markdown-mode} 2.6 or later.  The optional summary feature requires @uref{https://github.com/karthink/gptel, gptel}.  Session resumption for Claude Code sessions requires @uref{https://github.com/stevemolitor/claude-code.el, claude-code}.

The development repository is on @uref{https://github.com/benthamite/agent-log, GitHub}.

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

@menu
* Manual installation::
* Installation with use-package::
@end menu

@node Manual installation
@section Manual installation

Clone the repository to a directory on your Emacs load path and add the following to your init file:

@lisp
(require 'agent-log)
@end lisp

@node Installation with use-package
@section Installation with use-package

If you use @code{use-package}, add one of the following snippets to your init file:

@lisp
;; with vc
(use-package agent-log
  :vc (:url "https://github.com/benthamite/agent-log"))

;; with elpaca
(use-package agent-log
  :ensure (:host github :repo "benthamite/agent-log"))

;; with straight
(use-package agent-log
  :straight (:host github :repo "benthamite/agent-log"))

;; with quelpa
(use-package agent-log
  :quelpa (agent-log :fetcher github :repo "benthamite/agent-log"))
@end lisp

@node User options
@chapter User options

All user options belong to the @code{agent-log} customization group.  You can browse them interactively with @samp{M-x customize-group RET agent-log RET}.

@menu
* Backend configuration::
* Directory configuration::
* Display of thinking and tool sections::
* Timestamps::
* Tool output limits::
* Session browser options::
* Live updates::
* Summary generation: Summary generation (1). 
* AI search options::
@end menu

@node Backend configuration
@section Backend configuration

@vindex agent-log-backends
@vindex agent-log-active-backends

The user option @code{agent-log-backends} is an alist mapping backend key symbols to their feature (file) names.  Each entry is a cons cell @samp{(KEY . FEATURE)} where @samp{KEY} is a symbol identifying the backend (e.g. @code{claude-code}, @code{codex}) and @samp{FEATURE} is the symbol passed to @code{require} to load the backend file.  Backend files are loaded lazily on first use.  The default value includes entries for Claude Code and Codex:

@lisp
'((claude-code . agent-log-claude)
  (codex . agent-log-codex))
@end lisp

You would modify this to add a custom backend or to remove a backend you do not want available.

The user option @code{agent-log-active-backends} controls which backends are scanned for sessions.  It accepts either the symbol @code{auto} or a list of backend key symbols.  When set to @code{auto} (the default), the package checks whether each backend's root directory exists on disk (e.g. @samp{~/.claude} for Claude Code, @samp{~/.codex} for Codex) and activates only the backends whose directories are found.  Set it to an explicit list such as @code{(claude-code)} if you want to restrict the session browser to a specific backend regardless of what is installed.

@node Directory configuration
@section Directory configuration

@vindex agent-log-directory
@vindex agent-log-rendered-directory

The user option @code{agent-log-directory} specifies the root directory of the Claude Code backend's configuration.  The package reads @samp{history.jsonl} in this directory and looks for session files under the @samp{projects/} subdirectory.  The default value is @samp{~/.claude}.  You would change this only if you have configured Claude Code to use a non-standard location.  Each backend has its own directory configuration.

The user option @code{agent-log-rendered-directory} specifies the directory where rendered Markdown files are stored.  Each project gets its own subdirectory, and each session is rendered as a dated @samp{.md} file within it (@ref{Sync and rendering}).  The default value is @samp{~/.claude/rendered}.  You might change this if you want rendered files to live outside the default configuration directory, for example on a path indexed by a desktop search tool.

@node Display of thinking and tool sections
@section Display of thinking and tool sections

@vindex agent-log-show-thinking
@vindex agent-log-show-tools

Agent conversations contain thinking blocks (the model's chain-of-thought reasoning) and tool-use sections (file reads, bash commands, grep searches, and so on).  These are valuable for understanding what the assistant did, but they can also be verbose and clutter the view when you are reading the high-level conversation.

The user option @code{agent-log-show-thinking} controls how thinking blocks appear.  It accepts one of three symbols:

@itemize
@item
@code{hidden}: thinking blocks are omitted entirely from the rendered output.
@item
@code{collapsed}: thinking blocks are rendered but folded under a heading, so you see the heading but not the content until you expand it.
@item
@code{visible}: thinking blocks are rendered fully expanded.
@end itemize

The default value is @code{collapsed}.

The user option @code{agent-log-show-tools} works identically but controls tool-use and tool-result sections.  It also defaults to @code{collapsed}.

When both options are set to @code{hidden}, assistant turns that contain only tool calls and thinking (no visible text) are hidden entirely, including their heading and separator.

You can toggle individual sections interactively using @code{agent-log-toggle-section} (@ref{Section visibility}).

@node Timestamps
@section Timestamps

@vindex agent-log-timestamp-format

The user option @code{agent-log-timestamp-format} controls the format string used when displaying timestamps in rendered output.  It follows the conventions of @code{format-time-string}.  The default value is @samp{"%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S"}.

@node Tool output limits
@section Tool output limits

@vindex agent-log-max-tool-input-length
@vindex agent-log-max-tool-result-length

Tool calls can have very long inputs (entire file contents for Write, lengthy commands for Bash) and even longer results.  Two user options control how much of this content is shown in the rendered output.

The user option @code{agent-log-max-tool-input-length} sets the maximum number of characters displayed for tool input summaries.  Text beyond this limit is truncated with an ellipsis.  The default value is @code{200}.

The user option @code{agent-log-max-tool-result-length} sets the maximum number of characters displayed for tool result content.  The default value is @code{500}.

Increase these values if you find that truncated tool content is hiding information you need.  Decrease them if rendered files are too large or buffers are slow to navigate.

@node Session browser options
@section Session browser options

@vindex agent-log-group-by-project
@vindex agent-log-display-width
@vindex agent-log-slug-max-length

The user option @code{agent-log-group-by-project} controls whether @code{agent-log-browse-sessions} groups sessions by project (@ref{Session browsing}).  When non-@code{nil} (the default), the command first prompts for a project, then for a session within that project.  When @code{nil}, all sessions are presented in a single flat list.  The grouped view is more convenient when you have many sessions across several projects; the flat view is useful for quickly finding a recent session regardless of project.

The user option @code{agent-log-display-width} sets the maximum width of the first-message column in the session browser.  Longer messages are truncated.  The default value is @code{60}.

The user option @code{agent-log-slug-max-length} sets the maximum length of the slug portion of rendered filenames.  The slug is derived from the first user message and appears after the date in the filename (e.g., @samp{2026-02-22_11-56_redesign-agent-log-package.md}).  The default value is @code{50}.

@node Live updates
@section Live updates

@vindex agent-log-live-update

The user option @code{agent-log-live-update} controls whether the package watches the source JSONL file for changes when a rendered buffer is open.  When non-@code{nil} (the default), a @code{file-notify} watcher detects new entries appended to the JSONL file and renders them into both the open buffer and the @samp{.md} file on disk.  This means you can have a rendered log open alongside an active coding agent session and see new turns appear as they happen.

Set this to @code{nil} if you experience performance issues with file watching, or if you are on a system where @code{file-notify} is not reliable (e.g., certain remote filesystems via TRAMP).

@node Summary generation (1)
@section Summary generation

@vindex agent-log-summary-backend
@vindex agent-log-summary-model
@vindex agent-log-summary-max-content-length

The summary feature uses @samp{gptel} to generate concise descriptions of each session.  Three user options control how summaries are generated.

The user option @code{agent-log-summary-backend} specifies the @samp{gptel} backend name to use for summary requests, for example @samp{"Gemini"} or @samp{"Claude"}.  When @code{nil} (the default), the backend is inferred from @code{agent-log-summary-model} if set, otherwise it falls back to @code{gptel-backend}.

The user option @code{agent-log-summary-model} specifies the @samp{gptel} model to use, for example @code{claude-haiku-4-5-20251001}.  A smaller, faster model is often sufficient for summarization.  When @code{nil} (the default), it uses @code{gptel-model}.

The user option @code{agent-log-summary-max-content-length} sets the maximum number of characters of conversation text sent to the LLM for summarization.  The package extracts the plain text of user and assistant messages (ignoring tool calls and thinking blocks) and truncates the result to this limit.  The default value is @code{8000}.  Increase this for longer, more detailed summaries at the cost of higher token usage; decrease it if you want to minimize API costs.

@node AI search options
@section AI search options

@vindex agent-log-search-scope-backend
@vindex agent-log-search-scope-model
@vindex agent-log-search-backend
@vindex agent-log-search-model
@vindex agent-log-search-budget

The AI search feature (@ref{AI search}) uses two LLM calls: a scope-narrowing stage and a selection stage.  Each stage has its own backend and model options, allowing you to use a cheap, fast model for scope narrowing and a more capable model for the selection narrative.

The user option @code{agent-log-search-scope-backend} specifies the @samp{gptel} backend for stage 1 (scope narrowing), for example @samp{"Gemini"} or @samp{"Claude"}.  When @code{nil} (the default), the backend is inferred from @code{agent-log-search-scope-model} if set, otherwise it falls back to @code{gptel-backend}.

The user option @code{agent-log-search-scope-model} specifies the model for stage 1.  A small, fast model (e.g. @code{claude-haiku-4-5-20251001}) is recommended since the task is simple classification.  When @code{nil} (the default), it uses @code{gptel-model}.

The user option @code{agent-log-search-backend} specifies the @samp{gptel} backend for stage 2 (selection and narrative).  When @code{nil} (the default), the backend is inferred from @code{agent-log-search-model} if set, otherwise it falls back to @code{gptel-backend}.

The user option @code{agent-log-search-model} specifies the model for stage 2.  This model receives all filtered session summaries and must reason over them, so a more capable model may produce better results.  When @code{nil} (the default), it uses @code{gptel-model}.

The user option @code{agent-log-search-budget} sets a per-request cost threshold as a @samp{(TYPE . LIMIT)} cons cell, where @samp{TYPE} is either @code{tokens} or @code{dollars}.  Before stage 2 sends the filtered summaries to the LLM, the package estimates the prompt's token count (heuristically, one token per four characters).  If the estimate exceeds the limit, the user is asked to confirm with @code{y-or-n-p}.  The default value is @code{(tokens . 50000)}.

In @code{dollars} mode, cost estimation requires the @samp{gptel-plus} package.  If @samp{gptel-plus} is not available, the budget is not enforced and a warning is displayed.  Dollar estimates use the model's input pricing from @samp{gptel-plus} to convert the estimated token count to a dollar amount.

@node Commands
@chapter Commands

@menu
* Session browsing::
* Rendered directory::
* Sync and rendering::
* Navigation::
* Section visibility::
* Copying::
* Summary generation::
* Session rename::
* AI search::
* Session resumption::
@end menu

@node Session browsing
@section Session browsing

@findex agent-log-browse-sessions
@findex agent-log-open-latest
@findex agent-log-open-file
@findex agent-log-open-session
@findex agent-log-open-session-at-point

The command @code{agent-log-browse-sessions} is the primary entry point for exploring your session history.  It reads @samp{history.jsonl}, resolves each session to its JSONL file on disk, and presents the results in a @code{completing-read} prompt.  Each candidate is formatted as:

@example
2026-02-22 14:06  my-project  "Fix the authentication bug in..."
@end example

When @code{agent-log-group-by-project} is non-@code{nil} (the default), the command first prompts for a project, then for a session within that project (@ref{Session browser options}).  Sessions are sorted most-recent-first.  If AI summaries have been generated for any sessions (@ref{Summary generation}), the summary replaces the quoted first message in the candidate display.

Selecting a session lazily renders it to a @samp{.md} file if needed, then opens the rendered buffer in @code{agent-log-mode} (@ref{@code{agent-log-mode}}).

The command @code{agent-log-open-latest} opens the most recent session directly, without prompting.  This is convenient when you want to review the last conversation you had with a coding agent.

The command @code{agent-log-open-file} opens a specific JSONL file by path.  It prompts for a file path interactively.  This is useful for automation, for opening session files you found via the filesystem, or when you know the exact file you want.

The command @code{agent-log-open-session} opens a session by its ID@.  It prompts for the session ID interactively.

The command @code{agent-log-open-session-at-point} opens the log for the Claude Code session running in the current buffer.  This command is defined in @samp{agent-log-claude.el} and requires the @samp{claude-code} package; the current buffer must be a Claude Code terminal buffer.  The command reads the status file that Claude Code writes to @samp{/tmp/claude-code-status/} and uses the @samp{transcript_path} field to locate the exact JSONL file for the session.  This uniquely identifies the session even when multiple sessions (including branches created with @code{/branch}) share the same project directory.  If the status file is unavailable, it falls back to the most recently modified JSONL file in the project's session directory, or to searching @samp{history.jsonl}.  This lets you quickly jump from an active Claude Code session to its rendered log.

@node Rendered directory
@section Rendered directory

@findex agent-log-open-rendered-directory

The command @code{agent-log-open-rendered-directory} opens the rendered Markdown directory in Dired.  Since rendered files are plain Markdown organized by project, you can use standard Emacs tools to browse, search, and manage them.  For example, you can run @samp{consult-ripgrep} from this Dired buffer to search across all rendered sessions.

If the rendered directory does not yet exist, the command creates it.

@node Sync and rendering
@section Sync and rendering

@findex agent-log-sync-all
@findex agent-log-refresh

By default, rendering is lazy: sessions are rendered to @samp{.md} files on first access via @code{agent-log-browse-sessions} or @code{agent-log-open-file}.  The package maintains an index file (@samp{_index.el}) in the rendered directory that maps session IDs to rendered file paths and JSONL file sizes.  When you access a session, the package compares the current JSONL file size against the indexed size; if they differ, the session is re-rendered.

The command @code{agent-log-sync-all} renders all unrendered or stale sessions in bulk.  It processes sessions one at a time using @code{run-with-timer} to avoid blocking Emacs.  A progress message reports how many sessions were rendered.

The command @code{agent-log-refresh} re-renders the session displayed in the current buffer from its JSONL source.  This is useful if the rendered file appears stale or if you have changed display settings such as @code{agent-log-show-thinking} or @code{agent-log-show-tools} (@ref{Display of thinking and tool sections}).  The keybinding is @samp{g} in @code{agent-log-mode}.

@node Navigation
@section Navigation

@findex agent-log-next-turn
@findex agent-log-previous-turn

The command @code{agent-log-next-turn} moves point to the next User or Assistant heading in the buffer.  The command @code{agent-log-previous-turn} moves to the previous one.  These commands search for @samp{## User} and @samp{## Assistant} headings, skipping over tool calls and thinking sections.

The keybindings are @samp{n} and @samp{p} in @code{agent-log-mode}, making it easy to step through a conversation turn by turn.

@node Section visibility
@section Section visibility

@findex agent-log-toggle-section
@findex agent-log-collapse-all-tools
@findex agent-log-expand-all

The command @code{agent-log-toggle-section} toggles the visibility of the section at point.  When point is on a @samp{####} heading (tool call, tool result, or thinking block), it collapses or expands just that section.  When point is on any other heading, it delegates to @code{outline-toggle-children}.  The keybinding is @samp{TAB}.

The command @code{agent-log-collapse-all-tools} collapses all tool-use, tool-result, and thinking sections in the buffer at once.  This gives you a clean view of just the user messages and assistant text responses.  The keybinding is @samp{C}.

The command @code{agent-log-expand-all} expands all sections, removing all section overlays and showing the full content.  The keybinding is @samp{E}.

@node Copying
@section Copying

@findex agent-log-copy-turn

The command @code{agent-log-copy-turn} copies the current turn to the kill ring.  A ``turn'' is delimited by @samp{##} headings: from the current @samp{## User} or @samp{## Assistant} heading up to (but not including) the next one.  This is useful for extracting a specific message from a conversation to paste elsewhere.  The keybinding is @samp{w}.

@node Summary generation
@section Summary generation

@findex agent-log-summarize-sessions
@findex agent-log-stop-summarizing

The command @code{agent-log-summarize-sessions} generates AI summaries for all sessions that do not yet have one.  It requires the @samp{gptel} package.  The command processes sessions sequentially, sending each conversation's text to the configured LLM (@ref{Summary generation (1), , Summary generation options}) and storing the response in the index.  Summary requests disable @code{gptel-use-tools} so that globally configured tools (e.g. MCP servers) are not included in the request.

Each summary consists of two parts: a one-line summary (up to 80 characters) used in the session browser display, and a paragraph summary (3--5 sentences) shown at the top of rendered buffers.  The LLM is instructed to return a JSON object with @code{oneline} and @code{summary} fields.

Progress is displayed in the echo area, showing which session is being summarized and the model in use.  If you invoke @code{agent-log-summarize-sessions} while summarization is already running, it stops the current run instead.  You can also stop explicitly with @code{agent-log-stop-summarizing}.

Summaries are persisted in the index file, so they survive across Emacs sessions and do not need to be regenerated.  When you open a session that has a summary, the paragraph summary is inserted as a blockquote below the session header.

@menu
* Automatic summarization on session end::
@end menu

@node Automatic summarization on session end
@subsection Automatic summarization on session end

@vindex agent-log-sync-on-session-end

When @code{agent-log-sync-on-session-end} is non-nil, @code{agent-log-sync-all} and @code{agent-log-summarize-sessions} run automatically each time a Claude Code session terminates.  This requires the @samp{claude-code} package and a @samp{Stop} hook configured in Claude Code's settings (see the @samp{claude-code} documentation for hook setup).  The hook handler (@code{agent-log-claude--session-end-handler}) is defined in @samp{agent-log-claude.el} and is installed via @code{eval-after-load} when the defcustom is set before the backend is loaded.

Sessions with a live agent process are excluded from summarization by session ID@.  Each backend's @code{agent-log--active-session-ids} method provides the IDs of currently running sessions.  If summarization is already running when another session ends, the in-progress batch continues undisturbed.

@node Session rename
@section Session rename

@findex agent-log-rename-sessions
@vindex agent-log-auto-rename-sessions

The user option @code{agent-log-auto-rename-sessions} controls whether sessions are renamed automatically when they receive an AI summary.  When set to non-@code{nil}, each time @code{agent-log-summarize-sessions} successfully generates a summary for a session, the one-line summary is slugified and written as a @samp{custom-title} entry in the session JSONL file.  This makes the name immediately visible in Claude Code's @samp{/resume} picker without any manual step.

The default value is @code{nil}.  Set it to @code{t} if you want session names to stay in sync with summaries automatically.

The command @code{agent-log-rename-sessions} renames all sessions that lack a custom title.  This command is defined in @samp{agent-log-claude.el} because custom-title entries are a Claude Code-specific JSONL convention.  For each session that has a one-line summary in the index but no @samp{custom-title} entry in its JSONL file, the command writes the summary directly as the custom title.  With a prefix argument (@samp{C-u}), it overwrites existing custom titles as well, which is useful after changing the title format.

This is a purely local, offline operation — no API calls are made.  Sessions must be summarized first via @code{agent-log-summarize-sessions} (@ref{Summary generation}).  Sessions that already have a custom title (e.g. from Claude Code's @samp{/rename} command) are skipped.

After writing custom-title entries, the cached JSONL file sizes in the index are updated in a single bulk write so that @code{agent-log-sync-all} does not treat the modified files as stale and trigger unnecessary re-renders.

The command reports how many sessions were renamed, how many were skipped, and how many lacked a summary.

@node AI search
@section AI search

@findex agent-log-search
@findex agent-log-search-follow-link

The command @code{agent-log-search} searches your session history using natural language.  It prompts for a query string (e.g., ``how did I implement the caching layer?'' or ``conversations about authentication in my web app last month'') and uses a two-stage LLM pipeline to find relevant sessions.

@strong{Stage 1: scope narrowing.}  The query, along with a summary of the archive's metadata (project names with session counts, date range), is sent to a scope-narrowing model.  This model returns structured JSON specifying which projects and date range to include.  If the query does not mention a specific project or timeframe, all sessions are included.  The model and backend for this stage are configured via @code{agent-log-search-scope-model} and @code{agent-log-search-scope-backend} (@ref{AI search options}).

@strong{Stage 2: selection and narrative.}  The filtered session summaries (one-line and paragraph, from @code{agent-log-summarize-sessions}) are sent to a selection model along with the original query.  This model produces a Markdown narrative explaining which sessions are relevant and why, with inline links to specific sessions.  If more than 100 sessions pass the scope filter, only the 100 most recent are sent.  The model and backend for this stage are configured via @code{agent-log-search-model} and @code{agent-log-search-backend} (@ref{AI search options}).

The result is displayed in a @samp{*agent-log-search*} buffer in @code{agent-log-search-mode} (@ref{@code{agent-log-search-mode}}).  Session references in the narrative are rendered as clickable links.  Pressing @samp{RET} or clicking on a link opens the corresponding rendered session log.

Before starting, the command checks for unsummarized sessions.  If any exist, it warns the user that those sessions will be excluded and asks for confirmation.  If no sessions have summaries at all, the command aborts with a message to run @code{agent-log-summarize-sessions} first (@ref{Summary generation}).

Before stage 2, the estimated token cost is compared against @code{agent-log-search-budget} (@ref{AI search options}).  If the estimate exceeds the threshold, the user is asked to confirm.

@node Session resumption
@section Session resumption

@findex agent-log-resume-session

The command @code{agent-log-resume-session} resumes the session displayed in the current buffer in the coding agent.  The command extracts the session ID from the buffer (either from the buffer-local variable or from the front-matter comment) and dispatches to the buffer's backend via the @code{agent-log--resume-session} generic function.  For Claude Code sessions, this requires the @samp{claude-code} package and passes the session ID with the @samp{--resume} flag, starting in the session's project directory when possible.  The keybinding is @samp{r} in @code{agent-log-mode}.

@node @code{agent-log-mode}
@chapter @code{agent-log-mode}

@findex agent-log-mode

@code{agent-log-mode} is the major mode used for rendered session buffers.  It derives from @code{markdown-view-mode}, inheriting Markdown fontification in a read-only buffer.  Buffers are never marked as modified, so @samp{q} (@code{quit-window}) closes them without prompting to save.  The mode activates @code{outline-minor-mode} with a regexp that matches Markdown headings (=## =, =### =, =#### =), enabling section folding.

Two invisibility specs are added: @code{agent-log-collapsed} (which shows the heading but hides the body) and @code{agent-log-hidden} (which hides both heading and body).  These are used by the section visibility commands (@ref{Section visibility}) and the display configuration options (@ref{Display of thinking and tool sections}).

When a buffer in this mode is killed, the file watcher is cleaned up and the index is updated with the final JSONL file size.

The full keymap is:

@multitable {aaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Command
@tab Description
@item @samp{n}
@tab @code{agent-log-next-turn}
@tab Jump to the next User/Assistant heading
@item @samp{p}
@tab @code{agent-log-previous-turn}
@tab Jump to the previous heading
@item @samp{TAB}
@tab @code{agent-log-toggle-section}
@tab Toggle fold of section at point
@item @samp{C}
@tab @code{agent-log-collapse-all-tools}
@tab Collapse all tool/thinking sections
@item @samp{E}
@tab @code{agent-log-expand-all}
@tab Expand all sections
@item @samp{g}
@tab @code{agent-log-refresh}
@tab Re-render the buffer from scratch
@item @samp{w}
@tab @code{agent-log-copy-turn}
@tab Copy the current turn to the kill ring
@item @samp{r}
@tab @code{agent-log-resume-session}
@tab Resume the session in the coding agent
@item @samp{?}
@tab @code{agent-log-menu}
@tab Open the transient menu
@item @samp{q}
@tab @code{quit-window}
@tab Close the buffer
@end multitable

@menu
* @code{agent-log-search-mode}::
* Transient menu::
@end menu

@node @code{agent-log-search-mode}
@section @code{agent-log-search-mode}

@findex agent-log-search-mode

@code{agent-log-search-mode} is the major mode used for the @samp{*agent-log-search*} result buffer.  It derives from @code{markdown-view-mode}, providing Markdown fontification in a read-only buffer.  Session references in the LLM's narrative are replaced with clickable links: pressing @samp{RET} or clicking on them opens the corresponding rendered session log via @code{agent-log-search-follow-link}.

The keymap is minimal:

@multitable {aaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Command
@tab Description
@item @samp{RET}
@tab @code{agent-log-search-follow-link}
@tab Open the session link at point
@item @samp{q}
@tab @code{quit-window}
@tab Close the buffer
@end multitable

@node Transient menu
@section Transient menu

@findex agent-log-menu

The command @code{agent-log-menu} opens a transient menu that groups all @code{agent-log} commands into four columns: Open, Sync & AI, Navigate (shown only inside a @code{agent-log-mode} buffer), and Settings.  The keybinding is @samp{?} in @code{agent-log-mode}.  The menu is also available globally via its autoload, so you can bind it to a key of your choice outside of @code{agent-log-mode}.

The Open column includes @code{agent-log-resume-session} (bound to @samp{r}), which resumes the session displayed in the current buffer in the coding agent.  The Sync & AI column includes the @code{agent-log-search} command, bound to @samp{/}.

The Settings column displays the current value of each option (e.g., @code{collapsed}, @code{on}, @code{off}) highlighted with the @code{transient-value} face, matching the convention used by @samp{magit} and other transient-based menus.  In the Navigate column, @samp{G} refreshes the buffer; in the Settings column, @samp{g} toggles grouping by project.

@node How it works
@chapter How it works

@menu
* Backend architecture::
* Data sources::
* Rendered directory structure::
* Rendering pipeline::
* Live update mechanism::
@end menu

@node Backend architecture
@section Backend architecture

The package uses a generic interface to support multiple AI coding agents.  The base type @code{agent-log-backend} (defined with @code{cl-defstruct}) provides shared slots for the backend name, key symbol, root directory, and rendered directory.  Each backend extends this type via @code{:include} and implements a set of generic functions (@code{cl-defgeneric} / @code{cl-defmethod}) that handle backend-specific operations: session discovery, JSONL entry normalization, conversation filtering, tool input summarization, and session resumption.

Backend files are loaded lazily.  When a backend is first accessed (e.g. during @code{agent-log-browse-sessions}), the package calls @code{require} on the backend's feature name and the backend registers a singleton instance in a global registry.  The registry maps backend key symbols to struct instances, so all dispatch goes through the struct's type.

The rendering pipeline, session browser, live update mechanism, AI summaries, and AI search all operate on a normalized intermediate representation.  Each backend's @code{agent-log--normalize-entries} method converts its native JSONL format into canonical plists that the generic code expects.  Core functions such as @code{agent-log--render-to-file} and @code{agent-log--extract-conversation-text} receive a backend instance and thread it through to generic dispatch points (conversation filtering, entry classification, tool summarization, text extraction).  The convenience function @code{agent-log--read-all-sessions} returns sessions from the first active backend; individual buffers store their backend in the buffer-local variable @code{agent-log--backend}, set when a session is opened.  This means the core of the package is backend-agnostic: adding a new backend requires only implementing the generic functions, with no changes to the core file.

@node Data sources
@section Data sources

The Claude Code backend reads conversation data from two places:

@enumerate
@item
@samp{~/.claude/history.jsonl}: a global index mapping session IDs to projects and timestamps.
@item
@samp{~/.claude/projects/<encoded-path>/<uuid>.jsonl}: one file per session, containing all messages as JSON lines.
@end enumerate

The encoded path replaces @samp{/}, @samp{.}, and space characters with @samp{-}.  The package tries both the expanded path and its @code{file-truename} when locating a session directory, which handles symlinked project paths.

@node Rendered directory structure
@section Rendered directory structure

The rendered directory mirrors the project structure:

@example
~/.claude/rendered/
  tango-wiki/
    2026-02-04_14-06_fix-the-authentication-bug.md
    2026-02-05_09-22_refactor-database-schema.md
  dotfiles/
    2026-02-22_11-56_redesign-agent-log-package.md
  _index.el
@end example

Each @samp{.md} file contains HTML-comment front matter (session ID, source path, rendered timestamp, JSONL size) followed by the full conversation rendered as Markdown.  The @samp{_index.el} file is a hash table mapping session IDs to metadata (rendered file path, JSONL size, and optionally a summary).

@node Rendering pipeline
@section Rendering pipeline

Each JSONL entry has a @code{type} field: @code{user}, @code{assistant}, @code{progress}, @code{system}, or @code{file-history-snapshot}.  The package filters entries via the backend's @code{agent-log--filter-conversation} and @code{agent-log--conversation-entry-p} methods, which select @code{user} and @code{assistant} entries while excluding system-generated messages.  For Claude Code, system entries are those whose content starts with known XML tags such as @samp{<local-command-stdout>} or @samp{<command-name>}.

Filtered entries are rendered as Markdown with @samp{##} headings for conversation turns and @samp{####} headings for tool calls and thinking blocks.  User turns show any text content followed by tool results.  Assistant turns show thinking blocks, text content, and tool-use summaries.

The session header (the @samp{# Session: ...} line at the top of each rendered file) derives its project name from the @code{progress} entry in the JSONL, which contains the working directory.  Not all sessions have a @code{progress} entry; when one is absent, the package falls back to the project path recorded in @samp{history.jsonl}.

@node Live update mechanism
@section Live update mechanism

When @code{agent-log-live-update} is non-@code{nil} and a rendered buffer is open, the package registers a @code{file-notify} watcher on the source JSONL file.  When the file grows, the watcher reads only the new bytes (from the previously recorded offset to the new file size), handling incomplete UTF-8 sequences at chunk boundaries.  New complete lines are parsed and rendered incrementally, appended to both the buffer and the @samp{.md} file on disk.

@node Troubleshooting
@chapter Troubleshooting

@menu
* No sessions found::
* Rendered files not updating::
* Live updates not working::
@end menu

@node No sessions found
@section No sessions found

Ensure that @code{agent-log-directory} points to the correct configuration directory (@ref{Directory configuration}).  The package reads @samp{history.jsonl} in that directory and looks for session files under @samp{projects/}.

@node Rendered files not updating
@section Rendered files not updating

If a rendered file appears stale, press @samp{g} (@code{agent-log-refresh}) in the buffer to force a full re-render (@ref{Sync and rendering}).  You can also delete the index file (@samp{_index.el} in the rendered directory) to force re-rendering of all sessions on next access.

@node Live updates not working
@section Live updates not working

Verify that @code{agent-log-live-update} is set to @code{t} (@ref{Live updates}).  Live updates rely on @code{file-notify}, which requires OS-level file watching support.  On some systems (e.g., remote filesystems via TRAMP), file notifications may not be available.

@node License
@chapter License

GPL-3.0-or-later.

@node Indices
@chapter Indices

@menu
* Function index::
* Variable index::
@end menu

@node Function index
@section Function index

@printindex fn

@node Variable index
@section Variable index

@printindex vr

@bye
